# Terminology

To avoid problems while writing about a *private network*, we should make a distinction between a network
created by our ISP's router and the network we will be creating. From the technical point of
view both of them are *private*, which means they are non-routable in the Internet. But from the logical point
of view, our new network will be *private*, probably even more private than the network of our ISP.

To distinguish those two networks, I'll use the following acronyms:
* **ISP_net** for your standard **ISP** home **net**work.
* **LR_net** for our new **L**inux **R**outer **net**work.

# Choose a subnet for LR_net

Usually, a DHCP server is enabled on your ISP's router. DHCP stands for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
and is used (among other things) for assigning IP addresses to devices on the ISP_net. It means that
each device you are connecting to the ISP_net will receive an IP address from the DHCP range defined on the
ISP's router. Probably, the most common subnet in home networks is `192.168.N.0/24`, where usually
`N` is equal to `1` or `2`.

Now, it is time to **choose the subnet** for the network you will be creating, LR_net. Your new Linux
router will be equipped with its own DHCP server (ISC DHCP), assigning addresses to each device
you will connect to the LR_net. It is important to choose a **non-overlapping** network
with ISP_net, otherwise it will cause problems with routing of packets. For example:

ISP_net    | LR_net
-------------- | ---------------
`192.168.2.0/24` | `192.168.10.0/24`

## Gateway

You may have heard the name *gateway* in the context of networking. A network gateway is a device that connects
different networks; a gateway is an entry point to its network. So, without a gateway our computer could
only communicate with other computers in the same network.
Each packet destined for the Internet will probably have to go through several gateways. A *router* is a device
that will *route* packets between networks using sophisticated algorithms for searching the shortest possible
path between them. Most of the time, the functionalities of a gateway and a router are performed by a single device
commonly referred to as *router*.

Usually, the address of a gateway is the first usable address in a subnet, but this is just a convention. Nothing
prevents you from using an address from the middle of a subnet range. Continuing our example, the addresses of our
gateways (**GW**) will be:

ISP_net GW | LR_net GW
-------------- | ---------------
`192.168.2.1`    | `192.168.10.1`

## DHCP range

DHCP server range is simply a range of addresses that will be assigned to devices in our network. In ISP_net, the DCHP
range is probably the whole network without the gateway address, network address and the last address in the network
called the *broadcast* address. Broadcast address is commonly used to communicate with all devices in the network. For example,
when a computer boots, it knows absolutely nothing about the surrounding environment and is using broadcast communication
asking *every* machine in the network where the DHCP server is located.

Apart from dynamic IP addresses, we can use *static* IP addresses. This kind of computer network configuration is done manually
on each machine.

You can divide your network into two separate ranges, one for DHCP and one for static addressing. For example:

LR_net DHCP range  | LR_net static range
-------------- | ---------------
`192.168.10.2 -- 192.168.10.100` | `192.168.10.101 -- 192.168.10.254`

### Linux router address in ISP_net

Our Linux router has two network interfaces, each in different network (ISP_net and LR_net). During installation of Debian
and some time afterwards, only the interface in the ISP_net will be configured and available. You will use SSH or
Ansible to configure the LR and it would be nice if this address is always the same.

Before or after the installation of Debian, note the MAC address of the interface facing the ISP_net.
Log in into the ISP router and configure the DHCP so the same address is always assigned to our router.
This is also a form of dynamic configuration, but the address will always be the same for the
specified MAC address, and it will not be the first one available from the DHCP range. Reboot the LR to test
the configuration; check if LR has been assigned the IP address you provided in the ISP's DHCP configuration.

In this tutorial I will use `192.168.2.100` as the address of the LR in the ISP_net.

From now on, the ISP_net will be the **external** network from the LR point of view.
